Welcome back to our study of the book of Proverbs.
And we are in chapter seven, and we're going to read verse 22, all the way through to the end.
We're getting close to the end, believe it or not.
So open up your Bibles to Proverbs, chapter seven, verse 22.
Suddenly he follows her as an ox goes to the slaughter.
are as one in fetters to the discipline of a fool, until an arrow pierces through his liver, as a bird hastens to the snare so he does not know that it will cost him his life.
Now therefore, my sons, listen to me and pay attention to the words of my mouth.
Do not let your heart turn aside to her ways.
Do not stray into her paths.
For many are the victims she has cast down and numerous are all her slain.
Her house is the way to shield descending to the chambers of death.
Okay, let's go to the Lord and prayer.
Father, as we're reaching the close of chapter seven, I pray to your God.
Lord, our words are so feeble.
Your word.
is like a two-edged sword.
Lord, I pray that by the Holy Spirit that you would help the truths of this text to be communicated, Lord, to those who may be listening.
Oh, Father, that they would learn that there is a price to sin and that it can be deadly and it can be eternal.
Father, I pray that you would put your fear in the heart of the hearers, that they would reverence you, that they would be terrified of sin.
Father, please work in Jesus' name.
Amen.
We've looked at this wayward woman and we've drawn from her principles of how the world actually works or attempts to work in the life of the believer.
Now, we're going to look at what happens to someone who listens to the world.
This young man that we just read about, he follows her and it ends up in his ruin, his destruction.
I can tell you young people,
You follow the world.
You follow the opinions of the world.
You turn aside from Christ.
You turn aside from His teaching.
It will bring about your ruin.
It truly will.
You see, here's what you need to understand.
If you think I'm doing this just because I don't know, I like to teach the Bible.
You're wrong.
You see, for me, this is real.
It's a matter of life, death, heaven, hell, truth, a lie.
I'm sure you're, you're familiar of the story of the sort of damocles that it's hanging above someone on a, on a thread.
And in many ways, that's, that's the life of the sinner separated from Christ, following the world at any moment.
That's
Tiny, tiny string that thread can break and the sword comes piercing through to your own destruction.
Borrowing from Jonathan Edwards, we could talk about, you know, how small and weak is the web of a spider when touched by a flame?
Your life without Christ, your life of rebellion and disobedience, you're like a spider.
on a thin web over a blazing fire.
It doesn't even take a touch of a flame and the spider is no more.
There is a real sense in which you ought to fear.
You know, some fear is irrational, completely irrational.
Some fear is not.
It is quite rational.
and very healthy, it can save your life.
And the Bible sets before us the fear of the Lord, a deep and abiding reverence for Him, but also the fear of sin, of what it can do to us, the destruction it can bring about, not only in your life.
Young person, do you realize something?
You say, well, it's my life, doesn't affect anybody else.
That is just not true, that is.
That, that deserves the word stupid because that's what it is.
That's not true.
If my children destroyed themselves, do you think I would not be affected?
Do you think their friends would not be affected?
No, you don't live or die alone to yourself.
What you do has an impact on everyone.
Look at society today.
Okay.
It is a mass of people influencing one another for evil, living a life that is antichrist, that is separated from God.
Each one of them is having an impact on the other.
And what you need to understand is our lives will have an impact for good or for evil.
Now, for some of you who are older, children,
You need to realize what you do is also going to impact your younger siblings.
Because you're older, stronger, smarter, faster, they want to be like you.
You can either set a good example or an evil one.
I could say a bad one, but evil sounds more severe, doesn't it?
So how we live impacts others.
And we're going to see here that this young man
His life turns out to be a cautionary tale.
His life has become a story to warn others not to be like him.
Is that the legacy that you want to live?
Now, this young man's demise, his ruin, what is interesting here, it only takes two verses to describe his ruin.
All this, and we've had verse after verse after verse after verse, what?
21 verses of this lengthy sort of narrative of this life of his, and it just takes two verses, and he's destroyed.
He's destroyed.
And it says in verse 22, it says, suddenly he follows her.
Now I want to read for you something.
One single bad decision.
that takes less than a few seconds will bring his short life to an end.
How many people, how many young people have ruined their entire life with one bad decision?
I remember years and years and years ago, there was this basketball player and everyone thought, man, he is going to be amazing.
in the pros everywhere.
And everyone knew him as a good guy, like he was a nice person to be around.
Right before he, I think he was either recruited or right after he graduated from college and then recruited.
He went to a party, went to one party.
He wasn't known for alcohol, he wasn't known for drugs, he wasn't known for any of that, but he went to a party.
And many say it was the only time, first time he took a drug and he died immediately.
An entire life, one bad decision and he killed him.
One bad decision and it ruined everything.
I told my children this often and with purpose, I told them that do you realize
You can make a bad decision and maybe dad can step in and save you, but there can come a time when you make a bad decision.
You break the law.
You be driving drunk and hurt somebody else.
There's nothing dad can do.
There comes a time when there is absolutely nothing.
that someone else can do to save you.
In fact, there comes a time when even God will not save you.
That's what I told my children.
Now, so it says here in verse 22, suddenly he follows her.
Now here's a really important question.
Who are you going to follow whom?
You're going to follow someone.
I mean, you're not an island.
You're not inventing your life as you go without the influence of others.
You're going to follow someone.
Or if you really want to be hard about it, there are three possibilities.
You follow others.
You follow yourself.
You follow God's word.
Now, which is it going to be?
If you follow others that are going astray, that's not very wise, the Bible says you shouldn't follow yourself.
There's a way that seems right unto men, but it leads to death.
Wisdom wasn't born with you.
It won't die with you.
So you have to make a decision.
And the only wise decision is to follow God as he reveals himself in his word.
But here in verse 22, what do we see?
He follows her a very evil, wicked person.
Now think about this.
She has flattered him and he thinks that she really loves him.
that she'll be faithful to him.
But once you think about something, she wasn't faithful to her husband, she wasn't faithful to her children.
You think that the world's gonna come and be your friend.
No, the world is gonna be your friend as long as it's useful, beneficial, entertaining, pleasurable to the world.
After that, it's all over.
Remember the prodigal son?
I hope you do.
When he went out with his father's inheritance and he just partied like crazy,
Oh, man, did he have the friends?
They all gathered around him.
He was the talk of the town.
He was the focus of everyone's attention until what?
He ran out of money.
They couldn't use him anymore.
Then he just ate with the pigs.
Okay.
So he follows.
How does he follow?
As an ox goes to the slaughter.
Do you know why the ox goes to the slaughter willingly?
Because he doesn't know he's going to the slaughter.
because he's ignorant of the consequences.
Do not be ignorant of the consequences of sin.
Do not let someone deceive you as we've already learned that there are no consequences.
There are.
Listen, child, there are.
I've lived long enough to see so many lives ruined by sin and not just people in the world.
but people who claim to be in Christ.
And I do believe that even true Christians can sometimes push the envelope so much that there's no closing in again, that they do things in their life that bring a lifetime of regret.
She follows him or he follows her like an ox to the slaughter.
You ever seen cattle slaughtered?
I have many of them.
It's not a pretty picture.
and then go on verse 22 as one in fetters to the discipline of a fool.
Now I want you to think about that.
So you have someone that made a decision and now they are in chains.
There's nothing they can do.
They're being drug to the punishment of a fool.
You say, well, it's not the punishment of a criminal.
It really doesn't matter.
They are a criminal.
Why?
Because they were a fool.
And why?
How are they a fool?
Because they did not listen to God's word, but they listened to the world.
Maybe they didn't listen to their godly parents, but they listened to the world.
Do you see that?
It's really interesting.
There's a version of the Bible called the Syriac version.
It's it's second century, very old.
And it says this, like a stag.
prancing into a trapper's snare.
So like a stag, a big deer, an elk, something like that, just prancing.
All excited, all happy, and then all of a sudden, wam, the snare, right there.
Do you see that?
And that's the same way.
I'm gonna be honest with you, some people are this world, according to 1 John, and we may look at it later.
It's like,
a parade of clowns banging symbols and just walking off a cliff.
That's the idea that's being communicated here.
Now let's go on.
There's another description here.
It says, suddenly follows her as an ox goes to the slaughter or as one in the fetters to the discipline of a fool.
In verse 23, look what it says.
as a bird hastens to the snare.
He runs quickly and stupidly to the bait.
You know, when we talk about a bird brain, we're not talking about someone who's a genius, are we?
We're talking about someone who has no sense at all.
Even the largest birds in the world have a very, very small brain.
The fool that does not listen to the word of God is basically
a bird brain who runs straight to a bait, not thinking at all about the path of his feet.
And it ends in destruction.
But you know, we can remember when we studied Proverbs chapter one, it says even a bird.
Well, let me read it.
Proverbs one, 17 and 18.
Indeed, it is useless to spread the baited net in the sight of any bird, but they fools evil people.
lie and wait for their own blood.
They ambush their own lives.
I want you to think about that.
What is a fool?
Is a fool someone who is not intelligent?
No.
Is a fool someone who has a very low IQ?
A fool is someone who ignores God's word
They don't care to learn it.
And even what they know, they don't obey.
Now, I want us to look at 1 John chapter 2 verse 11.
How does someone become this foolish?
I mean, what's going on here?
If you go to 1 John 2, 11, it describes the sinner as one who is in the darkness,
and walks in the darkness and does not know where he is going because the darkness has blinded his eyes.
He doesn't know where he's going because he is in darkness.
Now, we could go into all kinds of things with this passage, but I just want one thing to stick in your mind.
If you are not in God's Word,
If you're not believing in Christ, if you're not studying God's Word, you're in darkness.
And that's all there is to it.
Because as we're going to see, the Bible is the light.
Knowing Christ brings light and studying the Scriptures bring light.
Now you may say, Brother Paul, I go to church, you know,
My family's Christian.
All right, wonderful.
Let me ask you a question.
How much time do you spend in the scriptures?
You say, well, I'm eight.
I don't care.
You can read, can't you?
How much time are you in the scriptures?
Child, you want to be something that very few people are.
Devote yourself.
Not to the reading of good books.
Devote yourself to the reading of the book.
The Bible.
From Genesis to Revelation, over and over and over and over and over again.
Until you're like John Bunyan.
You know what Spurgeon said about him?
If you cut him, he would bleed the blind.
Know what that means?
He'd bleed the Bible.
He was running through his veins.
Oh, if God would raise up a generation, not just of young men,
But if young women who know the word, then we would have a lot of people walking in the light.
I want you to listen to what David said, Psalms 119, 104, 105, or what the psalmist said, from your precepts, I get understanding.
Therefore I hate every false way.
Your word is a lamp to my feet and a light to my path.
Isn't that amazing?
Let's listen to it again.
From your precepts, from what is written in the scriptures, okay?
Not from dreams, not from visions, not from opinions, and not even from good sermons as important as they are.
No.
From directly reading the scriptures, I get understanding.
Now let's reverse that.
If you're not reading the scriptures, you don't have understanding.
Okay?
That's just the way it is.
And we, there's no need to argue about it.
You get understanding from God's scripture.
If you ignore God's scripture, you don't have understanding, at least not in the things that are important.
He says, from your precepts, I get understanding.
Therefore, when you read the Bible, you get understanding.
And when you get understanding, you know what you do.
You hate everything that's false.
And you love everything that is true.
You actually hate things.
You can identify things that are false and you hate them.
because your heart has been transformed by the Spirit of God and the Word of God and your brain has been renewed with the Word of God and the Spirit of God.
And therefore you're thinking like Christ thinks.
And the Bible says of the Messiah that he hated lawlessness and he loved righteousness.
Okay?
I hate every false way.
Now he's going to reiterate how is it that he gets understanding?
He says, your Word is a lamp to my feet and a light
to my path.
Man, I used to hunt in this place.
When I was a boy, it was really what we called swampy.
And we had this, what we called a water moccasin or a cotton mouth.
And there are some poisonous snakes that you gotta admit, they're beautiful.
This thing is not.
It's as ugly as it is mean.
It looks like a big slug.
They're fat.
They're big and they will chase you.
And as a little boy, you know, I got to where I could walk pretty well in the moonlight or in the early morning when there was just a little bit of light.
But man, when it was pitch darkness, you either did not walk through there or you walk through there with some sort of a light.
Okay.
Because those things are dangerous.
We call them two steppers.
They bite you and you take two steps and fall over.
So you needed a light in there.
You need light because the serpent that you're dealing with is far more dangerous than a cotton mouth or water moccasin.
Serpent's you're dealing with can bite you and bring about eternal death.
So you need the light of God's word.
All right.
All right, let's go to the Lord in prayer.
Father, thank you for your word, and I pray that you would use it, dear God, in the heart of those who are listening.
Oh, dear God, I think about the precious children, teenagers, how smart they may think that they are and how
how novice they actually are.
Please, Lord God, put in their hearts, their minds, the fear of the Lord, that they would know Christ and know the Scriptures and walk in that light.
In Jesus name, amen.